Political Theory (journal) - Wikipedia Political Theory (journal) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Academic journal Political Theory Language English Edited by Joshua Foa Dienstag, Elisabeth Ellis, Davide Panagia Publication details History 1973-present Publisher SAGE Publications Frequency Bimonthly Impact factor 1.088 (2021) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 (alt) · Bluebook (alt1 · alt2) NLM (alt) · MathSciNet (alt ) ISO 4 Political Theory Indexing CODEN · JSTOR (alt) · LCCN (alt) MIAR · NLM (alt) · Scopus ISSN 0090-5917 (print) 1552-7476 (web) LCCN 73641963 JSTOR 0090-5917 OCLC no. 39266906 Links Journal homepage Online access Online archive Political Theory (PT) is a bimonthly peer-reviewed academic journal. Broad in scope and international in coverage, PT publishes articles on political theory from a wide range of philosophical, ideological and methodological perspectives. Articles address contemporary and historical political thought, normative and cultural theory, the history of ideas, and critical assessments of current work. The journal encourages essays that address pressing political and ethical issues or events. The current Co-Editors are Joshua Foa Dienstag, Elisabeth Ellis, and Davide Panagia. The journal is published by SAGE Publications. First published in 1973, the journal emerged out of the disciplinary debates and methodological disputes in American political science departments in the postwar period.[1] During that time, normative and historical inquiry had been put under duress as a result of a postwar effort in the United States to specialize political science research on the basis of new methodological and behavioral techniques that promised predictive knowledge about future political outcomes. The first paragraph of the first Editorial Statement announces as much: "POLITICAL THEORY fills a long existing need for a journal of political philosophy that is broad in scope and international in coverage. The absence of such a journal was especially unfortunate because dialogue is essential for the practice of political philosophy."[2] Since its original publication the journal has remained a major reference of scholarly debate in political theory throughout the world. The journal was first housed at Columbia University and edited by Robert Lamb and Walter Odajnyk. Since then, the editorial offices have moved depending on who occupied the position of editor in chief. Benjamin Barber joined Lamb and Odajnyk in 1974 (and remained editor until 1984). William E. Connolly took over from Barber in 1984 and remained editor until 1990. The subsequent editors were Tracy Strong (1990-2000), Stephen_K._White (2000-2006), Mary_G._Dietz (2006-2013), Jane Bennett (2013-2017), and Lawrie Balfour (2017-2021). The current team of co-editors represents the first time that the journal is edited by more than one person, although the journal has always had an active editorial board. Along with the editorial teams, Political Theory also has a Book Review Editor in charge of the book review section of the journal. The current Book Review Editor is Nancy Luxon (University of Minnesota). Past Book Review Editors included Richard E. Flathman (Johns Hopkins University), Bonnie Honig (Brown University), Jane Bennett (Johns Hopkins University), Linda Zerilli (The University of Chicago), David Owen (University of Southampton), and Melvin Rogers (Brown University). The journal may also be followed on Twitter: @PoliticalTheory. Abstracting and indexing[edit] The journal is abstracted and indexed in Scopus and the Social Sciences Citation Index. According to the Journal Citation Reports, the journal has a 2021 impact factor of 1.08.[3] References[edit] ^ Gunnell, John (1993). The Descent of Political Theory. University of Chicago Press. p. 270. ISBN 978-0-226-31080-0. ^ Editorial Statement (February 1, 1973). "Editorial Statement". Political Theory. SAGE Publications. 1: 3–4. ^ "Journal Citation Reports". External links[edit] Official website This article about a journal on politics or political science is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. See tips for writing articles about academic journals. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page. v t e Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_Theory_(journal)&oldid=1014416559" Categories: SAGE Publishing academic journals English-language journals Publications established in 1973 Political science journals Bimonthly journals Political science journal stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Bimonthly journals (infobox) Articles with outdated impact factors from 2021 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last edited on 26 March 2021, at 23:15 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement