Political history - Wikipedia Political history From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about the academic field. For actual political history, see Political history of the world. Part of a series on Politics Index Outline Category Primary topics Index of politics articles Outline of political science Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Democracy Dictatorship Directory Federacy Feudalism Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science (political scientists) International relations (theory) Comparative politics Public administration Bureaucracy (street-level) Adhocracy Policy Public policy (doctrine) Domestic and foreign policy Civil society Public interest Organs of government Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Theories of political behavior Political psychology Biology and political orientation Political organisations Foreign electoral intervention High and low politics Subseries Electoral systems Elections (voting) Unitarism Federalism Form of government Ideology Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Political history is the narrative and survey of political events, ideas, movements, organs of government, voters, parties and leaders.[1] It is interrelated to other fields of history, especially diplomatic history, as well as constitutional history and public history. Political history studies the organization and operation of power in large societies. By focusing on the elites in power, on their impact on society, on popular response, and on the relationships with the elites in other social history, which focuses predominantly on the actions and lifestyles of ordinary people,[2] or people's history, which is historical work from the perspective of the common people. In two decades from 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of history in American universities identifying with social history rose from 31% to 41%, and the proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%.[3] In the history departments of British and Irish universities in 2014, of the 3410 faculty members reporting, 878 (26%) identified themselves with social history, and political history came next at 841 (25%) faculty members.[4] Contents 1 Political world history 2 Aspects of Political History 2.1 United States: The new political history 2.2 Britain 2.3 Germany 2.4 France 2.5 Social history 2.6 History of political regimes and institutions 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 5.1 In USA 6 External links Political world history[edit] Main article: history of political thinking The political history of the world is the history of the changes of political events; Aspects of Political History[edit] The first "scientific" political history was written by Leopold von Ranke in Germany in the 19th century. His methodologies profoundly affected the way historians critically examine sources; see historiography for a more complete analysis of the methodology of various approaches to history. An important aspect of political history is the study of ideology as a force for historical change. One author asserts that "political history as a whole cannot exist without the study of ideological differences and their implications."[5] Studies of political history typically centre around a single nation and its political change and development. Some historians identify the growing trend towards narrow specialization in political history during recent decades: "while a college professor in the 1940s sought to identify himself as a "historian", by the 1950s "American historian" was the designation."[6] From the 1970s onwards, new movements challenged traditional approaches to political history. The development of social history shifted the emphasis away from the study of leaders and national decisions, and towards the role of ordinary people, especially outsiders and minorities. Younger scholars shifted to different issues, usually focused on race, class and gender, with little room for elites. After 1990 social history itself began to fade, replaced with postmodern and cultural approaches that rejected grand narrative. United States: The new political history[edit] Traditional political history focused on major leaders and had long played a dominant role among academic historians in the United States. These studies accounted for about 25% of the scholarly books and articles written by American historians before 1950, and about 33% into the 1960s, followed by diplomacy. The arrival in the 1960s and 1970s of a new interest in social history led to the emergence of the "new political history" which saw young scholars put much more emphasis on the voters' behavior and motivation, rather than just the politicians.[7][8] It relied heavily on quantitative methods to integrate social themes, especially regarding ethnicity and religion.[9] The new social science approach was a harbinger of the fading away of interest in Great Men. The eclipse of traditional political approaches during the 1970s was a major shock, though diplomatic history fell even further. It was upstaged by social history, with a race/class/gender model. The number of political articles submitted to the Journal of American History fell by half from 33% to 15%. Patterson argued that contemporary events, especially the Vietnam War and Watergate, alienated younger scholars away from the study of politicians and their deeds. Political history never disappeared, but it never recovered its dominance among scholars, despite its sustained high popularity among the reading public.[10] Some political historians made fun of their own predicament, as when William Leuchtenburg wrote, "the status of the political historians within the profession has sunk to somewhere between that of a faith healer and a chiropractor. Political historians were all right in a way, but you might not want to bring one home to meet the family."[11] Others were more analytical, as when Hugh Davis Graham observed: The ranks of traditional political historians are depleted, their assumptions and methods discredited, along with the Great White Man whose careers they chronicled.[12] Britain[edit] Readman (2009) discusses the historiography of British political history in the 20th century. He describes how British political scholarship mostly ignored 20th century history due to temporal proximity to the recent past, the unavailability of primary sources, and the potential for bias. The article explores how transitions in scholarship have allowed for greater interest in 20th century history among scholars, which include less reliance on archival sources, methodological changes in historiography, and the flourishing of new forms of history such as oral history.[13] Germany[edit] In the course of the 1960s, however, some German historians (notably Hans-Ulrich Wehler and his cohort) began to rebel against this idea, instead suggesting a "Primacy of Domestic Politics" (Primat der Innenpolitik), in which the insecurities of (in this case German) domestic policy drove the creation of foreign policy. This led to a considerable body of work interpreting the domestic policies of various states and the ways this influenced their conduct of foreign policy. France[edit] The French Annales School had already put an emphasis on the role of geography and economics on history, and of the importance of broad, slow cycles rather than the constant apparent movement of the "history of events" of high politics. It downplayed politics and diplomacy. The most important work of the Annales school, Fernand Braudel's The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II, contains a traditional Rankean diplomatic history of Philip II's Mediterranean policy, but only as the third and shortest section of a work largely focusing on the broad cycles of history in the longue durée ("long term"). The Annales were broadly influential, leading to a turning away from political history towards an emphasis on broader trends of economic and environmental change. Social history[edit] Main article: Social history In the 1960s and 1970s, an increasing emphasis on giving a voice to the voiceless and writing the history of the underclasses, whether by using the quantitative statistical methods of social history or the more postmodern assessments of cultural history, also undermined the centrality of politics to the historical discipline. Leff noted how social historians, "disdained political history as elitist, shallow, altogether passe, and irrelevant to the drama of everyday lives."[14] History of political regimes and institutions[edit] MaxRange data is a project that defines and shows in detail the political status and development of institutional regimes of all states in the world from 1789. MaxRange also describes the background, development, external sources and major causes behind all political changes. MaxRange is a dataset defining level of democracy and institutional structure (regime-type) on a 100-graded scale where every value represents a unique regimetype. Values are sorted from 1-100 based on level of democracy and political accountability. MaxRange defines the value (regimetype) corresponding to all states and every month from 1789 to 2015 and updating. MaxRange is created and developed by Max Range, and is now associated with the university of Halmstad, Sweden [15] See also[edit] Historiography Diplomatic history Social history References[edit] ^ Politics: The historical development of economic, legal, and political ideas and institutions, ideologies and movements. In The Dictionary of the History of Ideas. ^ Parthasarathi, Prasannan, "The State and Social History[permanent dead link] ^ Diplomatic dropped from 5% to 3%, economic history from 7% to 5%, and cultural history grew from 14% to 16%. Based on full-time professors in U.S. history departments. Stephen H. Haber, David M. Kennedy, and Stephen D. Krasner, "Brothers under the Skin: Diplomatic History and International Relations," International Security, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Summer, 1997), pp. 34-43 at p. 4 2; online at JSTOR ^ See "History Online:Teachers of History" Archived 2017-01-22 at the Wayback Machine accessed 1/21/2014 ^ Freeman, Joanne B., "Founding Bothers" Archived 2007-06-29 at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard J. Jensen, Historiography of American Political History. In Jack Greene, ed., Encyclopedia of American Political History (New York: Scribner's, 1984), vol 1. pp 1-25 ^ Allan G. Bogue, "United States: The 'new' political history." Journal of Contemporary History (1968) 3#1 pp: 5-27. in JSTOR ^ Allan G. Bogue, "The new political history in the 1970s." in Michael G. Kammen, ed., The Past Before Us: Contemporary Historical Writing in the United States (1980) pp: 231-251. ^ Robert P. Swierenga, "Ethnocultural political analysis: a new approach to American ethnic studies," Journal of American Studies (1971) 5#1 pp: 59-79. ^ James T. Patterson, "The Persistence of Political History" in Richard S. Kirkendall, ed. The Organization of American Historians and the Writing and Teaching of American History (2011) pp 67-74; his statistical estimates appear on pp 70, 72 ^ William Leuchenburg, "The Pertinence of Political History: Reflection on the Significance of the State In America," Journal of American History (Dec. 1986) 73:585-600 in JSTOR ^ Hugh Davis Graham, "The stunted career of policy history: a critique and an agenda." The Public Historian (1993): 15-37. in JSTOR ^ Readman (2009) ^ Mark H. Leff, "Revisioning US political history." American Historical Review (1995) 100#3 pp: 829-853, quote p 829. in JSTOR ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2018-08-17. Retrieved 2015-05-02.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Further reading[edit] Callaghan, John, et al. eds., Interpreting the Labour Party: Approaches to Labour Politics and History (2003) online; also online free; British Craig, David M. "'High Politics' and the 'New Political History'." Historical Journal (2010): 453-475; British online Elton, G. R. The practice of history (1968), British. French, John D.. "Women in Postrevolutionary Mexico: The Emergence of a New Feminist Political History," Latin American Politics and Society, (2008) 50#2 pp 175–184 Huret, Romain, “All in the Family Again? Political Historians and the Challenge of Social History,” Journal of Policy History, 21 (no. 3, 2009), 239–63. Kowol, Kit. "Renaissance on the Right? New Directions in the History of the Post-War Conservative Party." Twentieth Century British History 27#2 (2016): 290-304. online Pasquino, Gianfranco. "Political History in Italy," Journal of Policy History July 2009, Vol. 21 Issue 3, pp 282–297; discusses political historians such as Silvio Lanaro, Aurelio Lepre, and Nicola Tranfaglia, and studies of Fascism, the Italian Communist party, the role of the Christian Democrats in Italian society, and the development of the Italian parliamentary Republic. excerpt Ranger, Terence. "Nationalist historiography, patriotic history and the history of the nation: the struggle over the past in Zimbabwe." Journal of Southern African Studies 30.2 (2004): 215-234. Readman, Paul. "The State of Twentieth-Century British Political History," Journal of Policy History, July 2009, Vol. 21 Issue 3, pp 219–238 Smith, Anthony D. The nation in history: historiographical debates about ethnicity and nationalism (UP of New England, 2000) Sreedharan, E. A manual of historical research methodology. (Trivandrum, Centre for South Indian Studies, 2007 Sreedharan, E. A textbook of historiography: 500 BC to AD 2000 . (New Delhi: Orient Longman, 2004) In USA[edit] Bogue, Allan G. "United States: The 'new' political history." Journal of Contemporary History (1968) 3#1 pp: 5-27. in JSTOR Gillon, Steven M. "The future of political history." Journal of Policy History 9.2 (1997): 240-255, in USA. Graham, Hugh Davis. "The stunted career of policy history: a critique and an agenda." Public Historian 15.2 (1993): 15-37; policy history is a closely related topic online Jacobs, Meg, William J. Novak, and Julian Zelizer, eds. The democratic experiment: New directions in American political history (Princeton UP, 2009). Jensen, Richard J. "Historiography of American Political History" in Jack Greene, ed., Encyclopedia of American Political History (Scribner's, 1984), vol 1. pp 1–25 online Larson, John Lauritz, and Michael A. Morrison, eds. Whither the Early Republic: A Forum on the Future of the Field (U of Pennsylvania Press, 2012). Leuchtenburg, William E. "The Pertinence of Political History: Reflections on the Significance of the State in America," Journal of American History 73, (1986), 585-600. Newman, Richard. "Bringing Politics Back in... to Abolition." Reviews in American History 45.1 (2017): 57-64. Silbey, Joel H. "The State and Practice of American Political History at the Millennium: The Nineteenth Century as a Test Case." Journal of Policy History 11.1 (1999): 1-30. Swirski, Peter. (2011). American Utopia and Social Engineering in Literature, Social Thought, and Political History. New York, Routledge. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Political history. Conference: Rethinking Modern British Studies, 2015, numerous papers and reports on the historiography of British politics. Abstracts of 2015 papers scholarly journal Diplomatic History Documents of Diplomatic History Fletcher School at Tufts International Relations Resources A New Nation Votes: American Elections Returns 1787–1825 (in French) French Website of the Comité d'histoire parlementaire et politique (Parliamentary and Political History Committee) and Parlement(s), Revue d'histoire politique, published three times a year. It contains a lot of information about French political history, including about 900 references of scholarly political history studies and a bibliography of parliamentary history. v t e Theories of history Annales Conceptual Cultural Economic Environmental Gender Historicism Marxist Macrohistory Microhistory Postcolonial Politics Postmodern Psychohistory Social List of historians History Big History v t e Historiography Historical method History Big History history theories of history historiography historians Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Archives Artifact Archaeological site Codices Deeds Facsimiles Feature Hieroglyphs Historical documents Manuscripts Papyri Religious texts Scrolls Organizations, institutes Historical society Historiographical Institute of the University of Tokyo Concepts (choice) Battle for Australia Pax Sinica Political midlife crisis Renaissance Translatio imperii Methodology, schools (choice) Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Case study Change and continuity Historical linguistics Great Man theory Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Historic recurrence Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historical realism Historicism Historiometry Cliometrics Historism Marxist historiography Historical materialism Microhistory Codicology Palaeography Intellectual history Idea of Progress History of modernisation theory Historical criticism Historical geography Historical geographic information system By country Albania Argentina Canada China Ethiopia Germany Hellenic Islam Japan Rome North Macedonia Serbia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Scotland Switzerland Turkey Others Historiography of science Historiography of the salon Historiography of the May Revolution Historiography of World War II Functionalism–intentionalism debate Historiography of early Islam Related Historical fiction Historical revisionism Historical negationism Historiography and nationalism Historical marker List of historians v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology (archaeology cultural linguistics social) Economics (microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical) Geography (human integrative) History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law (jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law) Political science (international relations comparative theory public policy) Psychology (abnormal cognitive developmental personality social) Sociology (criminology demography internet rural urban) Interdisciplinary Administration (business public) Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Media studies Philosophy of science (economics history psychology social science) Planning (land use regional urban) Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Category Commons Society portal Wikiversity Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_history&oldid=1012368977" Categories: Political history Fields of history Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский සිංහල Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links This page was last edited on 16 March 2021, at 00:50 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement