Directorial system - Wikipedia Directorial system From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Directorial system" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian. (February 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Italian article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Repubblica direttoriale]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|it|Repubblica direttoriale}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Part of a series on Politics Index Outline Category Primary topics Index of politics articles Outline of political science Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Democracy Dictatorship Directory Federacy Feudalism Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science (political scientists) International relations (theory) Comparative politics Public administration Bureaucracy (street-level) Adhocracy Policy Public policy (doctrine) Domestic and foreign policy Civil society Public interest Organs of government Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Theories of political behavior Political psychology Biology and political orientation Political organisations Foreign electoral intervention High and low politics Subseries Electoral systems Elections (voting) Unitarism Federalism Form of government Ideology Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government Power source Democracy (rule by many) Demarchy Direct Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Ergatocracy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Autocracy (rule by one) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchism (rule by none) Anarchy Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy vs. republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Socialist Authoritarian vs. libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Feudalism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Global vs. local (geo-cultural ideologies) Commune City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitary Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer State Vassal state Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Regional power Middle power Great power Superpower Politics portal v t e A directorial republic is a country ruled by a college of several people who jointly exercise the powers of a head of state and/or a head of government. In political history, the term directory, in French directoire, is applied to high collegial institutions of state composed of members styled director. The most important of these by far was the Directory of 1795–1799 in France.[1] The system was inspired by the Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776, which prominently featured a collegial 12-member Supreme Executive Council with a primus inter pares President. Variants of this form of government, based on the French model, were also established in the European regions conquered by France during the French Revolutionary Wars. In the past, Uruguay, Yugoslavia (after 1974), Ukraine,[2] and other countries were ruled by directories. The government of the Soviet Union could in some ways be characterized as a directory, but it developed in a much different pattern discussed in the article on Communist states. The sole country now using this form of government is Switzerland[3] (and to a lesser extent, San Marino), where directories rule all levels of administration, federal, cantonal and municipal. The Swiss Federal Council is elected by the Parliament for four years (its members cannot be dismissed), and is composed of seven members, among whom one is president and one is vice-president on a rotating basis, although these positions are symbolic in normal circumstances. There is no relationship of confidence between Parliament and the Federal Council. It is a shared system of government that reflects and represents the heterogeneity and multiethnicity of the Swiss people. Direct popular elections are used at the local level. Contents 1 Definition 2 Examples 2.1 Current 2.2 Former 3 See also 4 References Definition[edit] A directorial system is a system of government in which the executive power is split among a select number of individuals who are, or de facto are, equals. Some[who?] have argued that diarchies such as Andorra are directorial as executive power is held between more than one person.[citation needed] Israel's parliamentary system, a codified, streamlined variant of the Westminster System under which executive power is vested directly in the multi-person Cabinet (in contrast to the President acting on the advice of the Cabinet, as in a normal Westminster System) can be seen as semi-directorial. Examples[edit] Current[edit] Switzerland: Federal Council and equivalent executives of each canton San Marino: Captains Regent Former[edit] Pennsylvania SFR Yugoslavia Uruguay's National Council of Government Ukrainian People's Republic French Directory Soviet Union The Town's Legates Junta and the High Government Junta in Costa Rica New England Confederation See also[edit] Politics of Switzerland Politics of San Marino Political system Government of Switzerland Government of San Marino Executive (government) Collegiality French Directory References[edit] ^ Directory (French history) at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Directory (Ukrainian ruling body) at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ "Switzerland | History, Flag, Map, Capital, Population, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Directorial_system&oldid=1013432267" Categories: Republic Collective heads of state Power sharing Hidden categories: Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles needing additional references from August 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from February 2013 All articles to be expanded Government and politics articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles containing French-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lumbaart Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 21 March 2021, at 16:07 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement