Comparative politics - Wikipedia Comparative politics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Field and a method used in political science Select parliaments of the world, from top left to right: 1. National People's Congress, People's Republic of China; 2. United States Congress, United States of America; 3. Parliament of Australia, Australia; 4. Jatiya Sangsad, Bangladesh; 5. National Diet, Japan; 6. Parliament of Malaysia, Malaysia; 7. National Assembly, Nigeria; 8. Parliament of South Africa, South Africa; 9. Parliament of Canada, Canada; 10. Bundestag, Germany; 11. National Congress of Argentina, Argentina; 12. National Congress of Brazil, Brazil. Part of a series on Politics Index Outline Category Primary topics Index of politics articles Outline of political science Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Democracy Dictatorship Directory Federacy Feudalism Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science (political scientists) International relations (theory) Comparative politics Public administration Bureaucracy (street-level) Adhocracy Policy Public policy (doctrine) Domestic and foreign policy Civil society Public interest Organs of government Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Theories of political behavior Political psychology Biology and political orientation Political organisations Foreign electoral intervention High and low politics Subseries Electoral systems Elections (voting) Unitarism Federalism Form of government Ideology Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Comparative politics is a field in political science characterized either by the use of the comparative method or other empirical methods to explore politics within (as opposed to between) countries. Substantively, this can include questions relating to political institutions, political behavior, conflict, and the causes and consequences of economic development. When applied to specific fields of study, comparative politics may be referred to by other names, such as comparative government (the comparative study of forms of government). Contents 1 Definitions 2 Methodology 2.1 (Mill's) Comparative Method 3 Substantive areas of research in comparative politics 4 Notable works 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Definitions[edit] Comparative politics is the systematic study and comparison of the diverse political systems in the world. It is comparative in searching to explain why different political systems have similarities or differences and how developmental changes came to be between them. It is systematic in that it looks for trends, patterns and regularities among all these political systems.[1] This research field takes into account the political systems throughout the globe focusing on themes such as democratization, globalization and integration.[2] New and fascinating theories and approaches have been used in political science in the last 40 years thanks to comparative politics. Some of these consist of political culture, dependency theory, developmentalism, corporatism, indigenous theories of change, comparative political economy, state-society relations and new institutionalism.[3] Some examples of comparative politics are studying the differences between presidential and parliamentary systems, democracies versus dictatorships, the differences between parliamentary systems in different countries, the differences in a multi party system such as Canada or a two party system such as the United States, there are endless examples. Comparative politics must be conducted at a specific point in time, usually the present. You can not compare two different systems from two different periods of time, it must be static.[4] While historically the discipline explored broad questions in political science through between-country comparisons, contemporary comparative political science primarily uses subnational comparisons.[5] More recently, there has been a significant increase in the interest of subnational comparisons and the benefit it has on comparative politics. We would know far less about major credible issues within political science if it weren't for subnational research. Subnational research contributes important methodological, theoretical and substantive ideas to the study of politics.[6] Important developments, often obscured by a national level focus are easier to decipher with subnational research. An example of these important developments could be regions inside countries where the presence of state institutions have been reduced in effect or value.[7] The name comparative politics refers to the discipline's historical association with the comparative method, described in detail below. Arend Lijphart argues that comparative politics does not have a substantive focus in itself, but rather a methodological one: it focuses on "the how but does not specify the what of the analysis."[8] Peter Mair and Richard Rose advance a slightly different definition, arguing that comparative politics is defined by a combination of a substantive focus on the study of countries' political systems and a method of identifying and explaining similarities and differences between these countries using common concepts.[9][10] Sometimes, especially in the United States, the term "comparative politics" is used to refer to "the politics of foreign countries." This usage of the term is disputed.[11][12] Comparative politics is significant because it helps people understand the nature and working of political frameworks around the world. We have various types of political systems worldwide according to the authentic, social, ethnic, racial, and social history. Indeed, even comparative constructions of political association shift starting with one country then onto the next. For instance, India and the United States are majority rule nations; nonetheless, the U.S. is a liberal vote-based Presidential system contrasted with the parliamentary system used in India. Even the political decision measure is more diverse in the United States when found in light of the Indian popular government. The United States has a President as their leader, though India has a Prime Minister. Relative legislative issues encourage us to comprehend these central contracts and how the two nations are altogether different regardless of being majority rule. This field of study is necessary and critical for the field of International Relations and Conflict Resolution. Near Politics encourages International Relations to clarify worldwide legislative issues and the present winning conditions worldwide. Although both are diverse subfields of Political Science, Comparative Politics examines the causes of international strategy and the effect of worldwide approaches and frameworks on homegrown political conduct and working. Methodology[edit] While the name of the subfield suggests one methodological approach (the comparative method), political scientists in comparative politics use the same diversity of social scientific methods as scientists elsewhere in the field, including experiments,[13] comparative historical analysis,[14] case studies,[15] survey methodology, ethnography,[16] and others. Researchers choose a methodological approach in comparative politics driven by two concerns: ontological orientation[17] and the type of question or phenomenon of interest.[18] (Mill's) Comparative Method[edit] Main article: Mill's Methods Most Similar Systems Design/Mill's Method of Difference: This method consists in comparing very similar cases which only differ in the dependent variable, on the assumption that this would make it easier to find those independent variables which explain the presence/absence of the dependent variable.[19] Most Different Systems Design/Mill's Method of Similarity: This method consists in comparing very different cases, all of which however have in common the same dependent variable, so that any other circumstance which is present in all the cases can be regarded as the independent variable.[19] Substantive areas of research in comparative politics[edit] By some definitions, comparative politics can be traced back to Greek philosophy, as Plato's Republic and Aristotle's The Politics. As a modern sub-discipline, comparative politics is constituted by research across a range of substantive areas including, but not limited to the study of: Politics of democratic states Politics of authoritarian states Public goods provision and distributive politics Political violence Political identity, including ethnic and religious politics Democratization and regime change Elections, electoral and party systems Political economy of development Collective action Voting behavior Origins of the state Comparative political institutions Methodologies for comparative political research While many researchers, research regimes, and research institutions are identified according to the above categories or foci, it is not uncommon to claim geographic or country specialization as the differentiating category. Notable works[edit] Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba In their work, The Civic Culture, Almond and Verba embark on the first major cross-national survey of attitudes to determine the role of political culture in maintaining the stability of democratic regimes. Robert A. Dahl Polyarchy Montesquieu The Spirit of the Laws Barrington Moore In Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World (1966) Moore compares revolutions in countries like England, Russia and Japan (among others). His thesis is that mass-led revolutions dispossess the landed elite and result in Communism, and that revolutions by the elite result in Fascism. It is thus only revolutions by the bourgeoisie that result in democratic governance. For the outlier case of India, practices of the Mogul Empire, British Imperial rule and the Caste System are cited. James C. Scott The Art of Not Being Governed Alexis de Tocqueville Democracy in America and The Old Regime and the French Revolution Samuel P. Huntington The Third Wave and Political Order in Changing Societies Arend Lijphart Patterns of Democracy (1999), a comprehensive study of democracies around the world. Juan Linz & Alfred Stepan Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, and Post Communist Europe Seymour Martin Lipset Political Man: The Social Basis of Politics (1960) Pippa Norris Critical Citizens (1999) Robert D. Putnam Making Democracy Work (1993), a major work assessing why some democratic governments work and other fail, based on the study of the Italian regional governments. Theda Skocpol In States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France, Russia, and China Theda Skocpol compares the major revolutions of France, Russia and China: three basically similar events which took place in three very different contexts. Skopcol's purpose is to find possible similarities which might help explain the phenomenon of political revolution. From this point of view, this work represents a good example of a research conducted according to the Most Different Systems Design. Giovanni Sartori Parties and Party Systems See also[edit] Comparative law Historical sociology Political midlife crisis Political science State collapse Historic recurrence The anatomy of revolution References[edit] ^ Wiarda, Howard (June 17, 2019). "New Directions in Comparative Politics". login.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca. doi:10.4324/9780429494932. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Wiarda, Howard (June 17, 2019). "New Directions in Comparative Politics". login.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca. doi:10.4324/9780429494932. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Wiarda, Howard (June 17, 2019). "New Directions in Comparative Politics". login.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca. doi:10.4324/9780429494932. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Wiarda, Howard (June 17, 2019). "New Directions in Comparative Politics". login.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca. doi:10.4324/9780429494932. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Clark, William; Golder, Matt; Golder, Sona (2019). Foundations of Comparative Politics. Thousand Oaks,CA: CQ Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-5063-6073-7. ^ Giraudy, Agustina (2019). "Subnational Research in Comparative Politics". login.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Giraudy, Agustina (2019). "Subnational Research in Comparative Politics". login.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Lijphart, Arend (1971). "Comparative politics and the comparative method". American Political Science Review. 65 (3): 682–693. doi:10.2307/1955513. JSTOR 1955513. S2CID 55713809. ^ Mair, Peter (1996). "Comparative politics: An introduction to comparative.overview". In Goodin, Robert E.; Klingemann, Hans-Dieter (eds.). A New Handbook of Political Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 309–335. ISBN 0-19-829471-9. Archived from the original on 2011-06-06. Retrieved 2008-08-25. ^ Rose, Richard; MacKenzie, W. J. M. (1991). "Comparing forms of comparative analysis". Political Studies. 39 (3): 446–462. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9248.1991.tb01622.x. S2CID 145410195. Archived from the original on 2012-10-21. ^ Hopkin, J. [2002 (1995)] "Comparative Methods", in Marsh, D. and G. Stoker (ed.) Theory and Methods in Political Science, Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 249–250 ^ van Biezen, Ingrid; Caramani, Daniele (2006). "(Non)comparative politics in Britain". Politics. 26 (1): 29–37. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9256.2006.00248.x. S2CID 145654851. Archived from the original on 2013-01-05. ^ Gerber, Alan; Green, Donald (2012). Field Experiments: Design, Analysis, and Interpretation. New York, NY: W.W. Norton and Company. ISBN 978-0393979954. ^ Mahoney, James; Thelen, Kathleen, eds. (2015). Advances in Comparative-Historical Analysis. Cambridge University Press. ^ Geddes, Barbara (2010). Paradigms and Sand Castles: Theory Building and Research Design in Comparative Politics. Ann Arbor,MI: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-09835-4. ^ Simmons, Erica; Rush Smith, Nicholas (2017). "Comparison with an Ethnographic Sensibility". PS:Political Science & Politics. 50 (1): 126–130. doi:10.1017/S1049096516002286. ^ Hall, Peter (2003). "Aligning Ontology and Methodology in Comparative Politics". In Mahoney, James; Rueschemeyer, Dietrich (eds.). Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences. New York,NY: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-81610-6. ^ King, Gary; Keohane, Robert; Verba, Sidney (1994). Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03470-2. ^ a b Anckar, Carsten. "On the Applicability of the Most Similar Systems Design and the Most Different Systems Design in Comparative Research." International Journal of Social Research Methodology 11.5 (2008): 389–401. Informaworld. Web. 20 June 2011. External links[edit] Comparative Methods in Political & Social Research: useful resources from Prof. David Levi-Faur's course at the University of Haifa. Comparative Politics in Argentina & Latin America: Site dedicated to the development of comparative politics in Latin America. Paper Works, Articles and links to specialized web sites. Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method (Arend Lijphart) Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method (Arend Lijphart) Comparative Politics Research Group: An initiative by the University of Innsbruck containing useful resources and references to scientific publications. v t e Lists of countries by political rankings Freedom Political Freedom in the World Democracy Ranking Press Freedom House Reporters Without Borders Economic Fraser Institute The Heritage Foundation/The Wall Street Journal Trade Corruption Bribes Corruption barometer Corruption perceptions Competitiveness Composite Index of National Capability History Empire size Flag adoption date Formation date Geopolitical changes Rights Rule of Law Index Privacy Property rights Democracy Index Democracy-Dictatorship Index Gender Gap Index LGBT rights Other Discrimination and violence against minorities Government transparency Ease of Doing Business Index Environmental Performance Index Fragile States Index Good Country Index Globalization Index Global Innovation Index Global Peace Index Global Terrorism Index Global Liveability Ranking Prosperity Index Incarceration rate Political terror scale Global Slavery Index OECD Better Life Index Satisfaction with Life Index List of international rankings List of top international rankings by country Lists by country Authority control GND: 4137685-7 LCCN: sh85029298 MA: 82834280 NDL: 01081027 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Comparative_politics&oldid=1012707880" Categories: Comparative politics Subfields of political science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with MA identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Беларуская Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen मराठी 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Русский Svenska Tagalog Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 17 March 2021, at 21:31 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement