Executive (government) - Wikipedia Executive (government) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Executive" government – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (November 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of government that has sole authority and responsibility for the daily administration of the state Part of the Politics series on Executive government Head of state Monarch Supreme leader President President of the Council of State Government Head of government Chancellor Chief executive Chief minister First minister Premier Prime minister President of the Council of Ministers President of the Government Cabinet Government formation Cabinet collective responsibility Ministry Minister Secretary Other Governor Mayor Systems Monarchy (Constitutional) Republic (Parliamentary) Directorial Parliamentary (Westminster) Semi-parliamentary (simul simul) Semi-presidential (cohabitational) Presidential Lists National governments Heads of state and government Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Politics Index Outline Category Primary topics Index of politics articles Outline of political science Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Democracy Dictatorship Directory Federacy Feudalism Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science (political scientists) International relations (theory) Comparative politics Public administration Bureaucracy (street-level) Adhocracy Policy Public policy (doctrine) Domestic and foreign policy Civil society Public interest Organs of government Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Theories of political behavior Political psychology Biology and political orientation Political organisations Foreign electoral intervention High and low politics Subseries Electoral systems Elections (voting) Unitarism Federalism Form of government Ideology Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e The executive is the branch of government exercising authority in and holding responsibility for the governance of a state. The executive executes and enforces law. In political systems based on the principle of separation of powers, authority is distributed among several branches (executive, legislative, judicial)—an attempt to prevent the concentration of power in the hands of a single group of people. In such a system, the executive does not pass laws (the role of the legislature) or interpret them (the role of the judiciary). Instead, the executive enforces the law as written by the legislature and interpreted by the judiciary. The executive can be the source of certain types of law, such as a decree or executive order. Executive bureaucracies are commonly the source of regulations. Contents 1 Ministers 2 Presidents and ministers 3 See also 4 References Ministers[edit] Vanhanen II Cabinet in a session of Finnish Parliament in 2007. In parliamentary systems, the executive is responsible to the elected legislature, i.e. must maintain the confidence of the legislature (or one part of it, if bicameral). The legislature can, in certain circumstances (varying by state), express its lack of confidence in the executive, which causes either a change in governing party or group of parties or a general election. Parliamentary systems have a head of government (who leads the executive, often called ministers) normally distinct from the head of state (who continues through governmental and electoral changes). In the Westminster type of parliamentary system, the principle of separation of powers is not as entrenched as in some others. Members of the executive (ministers), are also members of the legislature, and hence play an important part in both the writing and enforcing of law. In this context, the executive consists of a leader(s) of an office or multiple offices. Specifically, the top leadership roles of the executive branch may include: head of state – often the supreme leader, the president or monarch, the chief public representative and living symbol of national unity. head of government – often the prime minister, overseeing the administration of all affairs of state. defense minister – overseeing the armed forces, determining military policy, and managing external safety. interior minister – overseeing the police forces, enforcing the law, and managing internal control. foreign minister – overseeing the diplomatic service, determining foreign policy and managing foreign relations. finance minister – overseeing the treasury, determining fiscal policy and managing national budget. justice minister – overseeing criminal prosecutions, corrections, enforcement of court orders. Presidents and ministers[edit] In a presidential system, the leader of the executive is both the head of state and head of government.[1] In a parliamentary system, a cabinet minister responsible to the legislature is the head of government, while the head of state is usually a largely ceremonial monarch or president.[2] See also[edit] Constitution Diarchy Legal reform Rule according to higher law References[edit] ^ "The Executive Branch". The White House. Retrieved 4 July 2015. ^ "Executive Branch of Government in Canada". Parliament of Canada. Retrieved 4 July 2015. v t e Civil service Concepts Public sector Government agency Bureaucracy Bureaucrat Technocracy Diplomat Public administration Public policy Public service By country/territory Australia Bangladesh Brazil Canada China Hong Kong France Germany India Ireland Italy Japan Malaysia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Russia Singapore Sri Lanka United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States European Union Categories National civil service commissions Government occupations Civil service by country See also: Civil service reform in developing countries v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Deed Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Restitution Statutory law Tort Other subjects Agricultural law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Election law Energy law Entertainment law Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International human rights International slavery laws Jurimetrics Labour Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Media law Military law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Space law Sports law Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Women in law Sources of law Charter Code Constitution Custom Divine right Divine law Human rights Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of Parliament Act of Congress (US) Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Sharia Roman law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Critical legal studies Comparative law Feminist Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Law and economics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Rule of law Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Criminal justice Court-martial Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Verdict Legal institutions Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Legal education Law school Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal Category Index Outline Portal v t e Separation of powers Typical branches Executive Legislature Judiciary Additional branches Fourth Estate Civil service commission Auditory Electoral Prosecutory By country Australia Hong Kong United Kingdom United States Singapore See also Fusion of powers Separation of duties Judicial independence Judicial review Dual mandate Authority control GND: 4131719-1 NDL: 00562701 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Executive_(government)&oldid=1013434794" Categories: Constitutional law Separation of powers Public law Executive branches of government Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from November 2019 All articles needing rewrite Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with short description Articles with long short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lumbaart Magyar मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 21 March 2021, at 16:23 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement