Politics (Aristotle) - Wikipedia Politics (Aristotle) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Part of a series on the Corpus Aristotelicum Logic (Organon) Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Natural philosophy (physics) Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Universe* On the Soul Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration On Breath* History of Animals Parts of Animals Movement of Animals Progression of Animals Generation of Animals On Colors* On Things Heard* Physiognomonics* On Plants* On Marvellous Things Heard* Mechanics† Problems† On Indivisible Lines* The Situations and Names of Winds* On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias* Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics Politics Nicomachean Ethics Magna Moralia† Eudemian Ethics On Virtues and Vices* Politics Economics† Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric Poetics Rhetoric Rhetoric to Alexander* Poetics Fragments Fragments† Aristotle Aristotelianism [*]: Generally agreed to be spurious [†]: Authenticity disputed v t e Politics (Greek: Πολιτικά, Politiká) is a work of political philosophy by Aristotle, a 4th-century BC Greek philosopher. The end of the Nicomachean Ethics declared that the inquiry into ethics necessarily follows into politics, and the two works are frequently considered to be parts of a larger treatise—or perhaps connected lectures—dealing with the "philosophy of human affairs". The title of Politics literally means "the things concerning the polis", and is the origin of the modern English word politics. Contents 1 Overview 1.1 Structure 1.2 Book I 1.3 Book II 1.4 Book III 1.5 Book IV 1.6 Book V 1.7 Book VI 1.8 Book VII 1.9 Book VIII 2 Classification of constitutions 3 Composition 4 See also 5 Translations 6 Notes 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links 8.1 Versions Overview[edit] Structure[edit] Aristotle's Politics is divided into eight books, which are each further divided into chapters. Citations of this work, as with the rest of the works of Aristotle, are often made by referring to the Bekker section numbers. Politics spans the Bekker sections 1252a to 1342b. Book I[edit] In the first book, Aristotle discusses the city (polis) or "political community" (koinōnia politikē) as opposed to other types of communities and partnerships such as the household (oikos) and village. The highest form of community is the polis. Aristotle comes to this conclusion because he believes the public life is far more virtuous than the private and because men are "political animals".[1] He begins with the relationship between the city and man (I. 1–2), and then specifically discusses the household (oikos) (I. 3–13).[2] He takes issue with the view that political rule, kingly rule, rule over slaves and rule over a household or village are only different in size. He then examines in what way the city may be said to be natural. Aristotle discusses the parts of the household (oikos), which includes slaves, leading to a discussion of whether slavery can ever be just and better for the person enslaved or is always unjust and bad. He distinguishes between those who are slaves because the law says they are and those who are slaves by nature, saying the inquiry hinges on whether there are any such natural slaves. Only someone as different from other people as the body is from the soul or beasts are from human beings would be a slave by nature, Aristotle concludes, all others being slaves solely by law or convention. Some scholars have therefore concluded that the qualifications for natural slavery preclude the existence of such a being.[3] Aristotle then moves to the question of property in general, arguing that the acquisition of property does not form a part of household management (oikonomike) and criticizing those who take it too seriously. It is necessary, but that does not make it a part of household management any more than it makes medicine a part of household management just because health is necessary. He criticizes income based upon trade and upon interest, saying that those who become avaricious do so because they forget that money merely symbolizes wealth without being wealth and "contrary to nature" on interest because it increases by itself not through exchange. Book I concludes with Aristotle's assertion that the proper object of household rule is the virtuous character of one's wife and children, not the management of slaves or the acquisition of property. Rule over the slaves is despotic, rule over children kingly, and rule over one's wife political (except there is no rotation in office). Aristotle questions whether it is sensible to speak of the "virtue" of a slave and whether the "virtues" of a wife and children are the same as those of a man before saying that because the city must be concerned that its women and children be virtuous, the virtues that the father should instill are dependent upon the regime and so the discussion must turn to what has been said about the best regime. Book II[edit] Book II examines various views concerning the best regime.[2] It opens with an analysis of the regime presented in Plato's Republic (2. 1–5), holding that communal share of property between the guardians will increase rather than decrease dissensions, and sharing of wives and children will destroy natural affection. He concludes that common sense is against this arrangement for good reason, and claims that experiment shows it to be impractical. Next, an analysis of the regime presented in Plato's Laws (2. 6). Aristotle then discusses the systems presented by two other philosophers, Phaleas of Chalcedon (2. 7) and Hippodamus of Miletus (2. 8). After addressing regimes invented by theorists, Aristotle moves to the examination of three regimes that are commonly held to be well managed. These are the Spartan (2. 9), Cretan (2. 10), and Carthaginian (2. 11). The book concludes with some observations on regimes and legislators. Book III[edit] Who can be a citizen? "He who has the power to take part in the deliberative or judicial administration of any state is said by us to be a citizen of that state; and speaking generally, a state is a body of citizens sufficing for the purpose of life. But in practice a citizen is defined to be one of whom both the parents are citizens; others insist on going further back; say two or three or more grandparents." Aristotle asserts that a citizen is anyone who can take part in the governmental process. He finds that most people in the polis are capable of being citizens. This is contrary to the Platonist view, asserting that only very few can take part in the deliberative or judicial administration of the state.[1] Classification of constitution and common good. Just distribution of political power. Types of monarchies: Monarchy: exercised over voluntary subjects, but limited to certain functions; the king was a general and a judge, and had control of religion. Absolute: government of one for the absolute good Barbarian: legal and hereditary + willing subjects Dictator: installed by foreign power elective dictatorship + willing subjects (elective tyranny) Book IV[edit] Aristotle's classification of constitutions Tasks of political theory Why are there many types of constitutions? Types of democracies Types of oligarchies Polity (Constitutional Government) – highest form of government When perverted, a Polity becomes a Democracy, the least harmful derivative government as regarded by Aristotle. Government offices Book V[edit] Constitutional change Revolutions in different types of constitutions and ways to preserve constitutions Instability of tyrannies Book VI[edit] Democratic constitutions Oligarchic constitutions Book VII[edit] Best state and best life Ideal state: its population, territory, and position Citizens of the ideal state Marriage and children Book VIII[edit] Education in the ideal state Music Theory Classification of constitutions[edit] After studying a number of real and theoretical city-states' constitutions, Aristotle classified them according to various criteria. On one side stand the true (or good) constitutions, which are considered such because they aim for the common good, and on the other side the perverted (or deviant) ones, considered such because they aim for the well being of only a part of the city. The constitutions are then sorted according to the "number" of those who participate to the magistracies: one, a few, or many. Aristotle's sixfold classification is slightly different from the one found in The Statesman by Plato. The diagram above illustrates Aristotle's classification. Moreover, following Plato's vague ideas, he developed a coherent theory of integrating various forms of power into a so-called mixed state: It is … constitutional to take … from oligarchy that offices are to be elected, and from democracy that this is not to be on a property-qualification. This then is the mode of the mixture; and the mark of a good mixture of democracy and oligarchy is when it is possible to speak of the same constitution as a democracy and as an oligarchy. — Aristotle. Politics, Book 4, 1294b.10–18 To illustrate this approach, Aristotle proposed a first-of-its-kind mathematical model of voting, albeit textually described, where the democratic principle of "one voter–one vote" is combined with the oligarchic "merit-weighted voting"; for relevant quotes and their translation into mathematical formulas see (Tangian 2020).[4] Composition[edit] The literary character of the Politics is subject to some dispute, growing out of the textual difficulties that attended the loss of Aristotle's works. Book III ends with a sentence that is repeated almost verbatim at the start of Book VII, while the intervening Books IV–VI seem to have different flavor from the rest; Book IV seems to refer several times back to the discussion of the best regime contained in Books VII–VIII.[5] Some editors have therefore inserted Books VII–VIII after Book III. At the same time, however, references to the "discourses on politics" that occur in the Nicomachean Ethics suggest that the treatise as a whole ought to conclude with the discussion of education that occurs in Book VIII of the Politics, although it is not certain that Aristotle is referring to the Politics here.[6] Werner Jaeger suggested that the Politics actually represents the conflation of two, distinct treatises.[7] The first (Books I–III, VII–VIII) would represent a less mature work from when Aristotle had not yet fully broken from Plato, and consequently show a greater emphasis on the best regime. The second (Books IV–VI) would be more empirically minded, and thus belong to a later stage of development. Carnes Lord, a scholar on Aristotle, has argued against the sufficiency of this view, however, noting the numerous cross-references between Jaeger's supposedly separate works and questioning the difference in tone that Jaeger saw between them. For example, Book IV explicitly notes the utility of examining actual regimes (Jaeger's "empirical" focus) in determining the best regime (Jaeger's "Platonic" focus). Instead, Lord suggests that the Politics is indeed a finished treatise, and that Books VII and VIII do belong in between Books III and IV; he attributes their current ordering to a merely mechanical transcription error.[8] It is uncertain if Politics was translated into Arabic like most of his major works.[9] Its influence and ideas were, however, carried over to Arabic philosophers.[10] See also[edit] Plato's five regimes Translations[edit] Barker, Sir Ernest (1995). The Politics of Aristotle. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-953873-7. Jowett, Benjamin (1984). Jonathan Barnes (ed.). Politics. The Complete Works of Aristotle. 2. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01651-1. Lord, Carnes (2013). Aristotle's Politics: Second Edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-92183-9. Lord, Carnes (1984). The Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-02669-5. (Out of Print) Reeve, C. D. C. (1998). Politics. Indianapolis: Hackett. ISBN 978-0-87220-388-4. Sachs, Joe (2012). Politics. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Focus. ISBN 978-1585103768. Simpson, Peter L. P. (1997). The Politics of Aristotle: Translation, Analysis, and Notes. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-2327-9. Sinclair, T. A. (1981). The Politics. Harmondsworth: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-044421-6. Notes[edit] ^ a b Ebenstein, Alan (2002). Introduction to Political Thinkers. Boston, MA: Wadsworth. ^ a b Lord (1982), "Introduction," 27. ^ Nichols, Mary (1992). Citizens and Statesmen. Maryland: Rowman and Little field Publishers, Inc. ^ Tangian 2020, pp. 35–38. ^ Lord (1982), "Introduction," 15. ^ Lord (1982), "Introduction," 19, 246 n. 53. ^ Werner Jaeger, Aristoteles: Grundlegung einer Geschichte seiner Entwicklung (1923). ^ Lord (1982), "Introduction," 15–16 ^ Pinès (1986), 47, 56 ^ Pinès (1986), 56 Works cited[edit] Lord, Carnes (1982). Education and Culture in the Political Thought of Aristotle. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Pinès, Shlomo (1986). "Aristotle's Politics in Arabic Philosophy". Collected works of Shlomo Pines: Studies in Arabic Versions of Greek texts and in Medieval Science. 2. Jerusalem: The Magnes Press. pp. 146–156. ISBN 965-223-626-8. Tangian, Andranik (2020). Analytical theory of democracy. Vol. 1. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-39691-6. ISBN 978-3-030-39690-9. Further reading[edit] Aquinas, St. Thomas (2007). Commentary on Aristotle's Politics. Indianapolis: Hackett publishing company, inc. Barker, Sir Ernest (1906). The Political Thought of Plato and Aristotle. London: Methuen. Davis, Michael (1996). The Politics of Philosophy: A Commentary on Aristotle's Politics. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. Goodman, Lenn E.; Talisse, Robert B. (2007). Aristotle's Politics Today. Albany: State University of New York Press. Keyt, David; Miller, Fred D. (1991). A Companion to Aristotle's Politics. Cambridge: Blackwell. Kraut, ed., Richard; Skultety, Steven (2005). Aristotle's Politics: Critical Essays. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.CS1 maint: extra text: authors list (link) Simpson, Peter L. (1998). A Philosophical Commentary on the Politics of Aristotle. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. Miller, Fred D. (1995). Nature, Justice, and Rights in Aristotle's Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Mayhew, Robert (1997). Aristotle's Criticism of Plato's Republic. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. Strauss, Leo (Ch. 1). The City and Man. Salkever, Stephen. Finding the Mean. Nussbaum, Martha. The Fragility of Goodness. Mara, Gerald. "Political Theory 23 (1995): 280–303". The Near Made Far Away. Frank, Jill. A Democracy of Distinction. Salkever, Stephen. The Cambridge Companion to Ancient Greek Political Theory. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Politics (Aristotle). Wikisource has original text related to this article: Politics Aristotle: Politics entry by Edward Clayton in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Miller, Fred. "Aristotle's Political Theory". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Aristotle's Politics on In Our Time at the BBC Versions[edit] Politics, full text by Project Gutenberg, trans. by William Ellis English translation at Perseus Digital Library, translation by Harris Rackham Australian copy, trans. by Benjamin Jowett HTML , trans. by Benjamin Jowett PDF at McMaster, trans. by Benjamin Jowett Politics public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Lyceum Peripatetic school Physics Biology Ethics Logic Theology (unmoved mover) Ideas and interests Active intellect Antiperistasis Arete Category of being Catharsis Classical unities Correspondence theory of truth Essence–accident Eudaimonia Four causes Future contingents Genus–differentia Hexis Hylomorphism Intromission theory of vision Ignoratio elenchi Lexis Magnanimity Mimesis Minima naturalia Moderate realism Aristotle's theory of universals (substantial form) Mythos Philosophy of nature (sublunary sphere) Philia Plenism Rational animal Phronesis Potentiality and actuality Sensus communis Substance theory (hypokeimenon, ousia) Syllogism Telos Temporal finitism To ti en einai/to ti esti Use value/exchange value Virtue ethics Corpus Aristotelicum Physics Organon Nicomachean Ethics Politics Metaphysics On the Soul Rhetoric Poetics Followers Alexander the Great Lyceum Aristoxenus Clearchus of Soli Dicaearchus Eudemus of Rhodes Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Critolaus Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Andronicus of Rhodes Islamic Golden Age Al-Kindi Al-Farabi Avicenna Averroes Jewish Maimonides Scholastics Peter Lombard Albertus Magnus Thomas Aquinas Duns Scotus Peter of Spain Jacopo Zabarella Pietro Pomponazzi Cesar Cremonini Modern Newman Trendelenburg Brentano Adler Foot MacIntyre Smith Hursthouse Nussbaum Related topics Platonism Commentaries on Aristotle Recovery of Aristotle Scholasticism Thomism Conimbricenses Pseudo-Aristotle Views on women Aristotle's wheel paradox Aristotle's razor Metabasis paradox Category Philosophy portal Authority control BNF: cb120476029 (data) GND: 4125035-7 VIAF: 316365805 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 316365805 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Politics_(Aristotle)&oldid=1007995772" Categories: Ancient Greek law Books in political philosophy Political philosophy in ancient Greece Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text CS1 maint: extra text: authors list Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latina Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 21 February 2021, at 00:53 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement