Portal:Politics - Wikipedia Portal:Politics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Politics Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal Main Categories and topics Tasks and projects The Politics portal Politics (from Greek: Πολιτικά, politiká, 'affairs of the cities') is the set of activities that are associated with making decisions in groups, or other forms of power relations between individuals, such as the distribution of resources or status. The branch of social science that studies politics is referred to as political science. It may be used positively in the context of a "political solution" which is compromising and non-violent, or descriptively as "the art or science of government", but also often carries a negative connotation. For example, abolitionist Wendell Phillips declared that "we do not play politics; anti-slavery is no half-jest with us." The concept has been defined in various ways, and different approaches have fundamentally differing views on whether it should be used extensively or limitedly, empirically or normatively, and on whether conflict or co-operation is more essential to it. A variety of methods are deployed in politics, which include promoting one's own political views among people, negotiation with other political subjects, making laws, and exercising force, including warfare against adversaries. Politics is exercised on a wide range of social levels, from clans and tribes of traditional societies, through modern local governments, companies and institutions up to sovereign states, to the international level. In modern nation states, people often form political parties to represent their ideas. Members of a party often agree to take the same position on many issues and agree to support the same changes to law and the same leaders. An election is usually a competition between different parties. A political system is a framework which defines acceptable political methods within a society. The history of political thought can be traced back to early antiquity, with seminal works such as Plato's Republic, Aristotle's Politics, Chanakya's Arthashastra and Chanakya Niti (3rd century BCE), as well as the works of Confucius. (Full article...) Read more... Refresh with new selections below (purge) edit Selected article A Vindication of the Rights of Woman is a 1791 book of feminist philosophy by Mary Wollstonecraft. In it, Wollstonecraft responds to the educational and political theorists of the eighteenth century who wanted to deny women an education. She argues that women ought to have an education commensurate with their position in society, claiming that women are essential to the nation because they educate its children and because they could be "companions" to their husbands, rather than mere wives. Instead of viewing women as ornaments to society or property to be traded in marriage, Wollstonecraft maintains that they are human beings deserving of the same fundamental rights as men. Wollstonecraft was prompted to write the Rights of Woman by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord's 1791 report to the French National Assembly which stated that women should only receive a domestic education; she used her commentary on this specific event to launch a broad attack against sexual double standards and to indict men for encouraging women to indulge in excessive emotion. Wollstonecraft wrote the Rights of Woman hurriedly in order to respond directly to ongoing events; she intended to write a more thoughtful second volume, but she died before completing it. More selected articles More... edit Featured picture Credit: Artist: James Albert Wales; Lithography: Mayer, Merkel, & Ottmann; Restoration: Jujutacular An 1880 political cartoon depicts Senator Roscoe Conkling over a "presidential puzzle" consisting of some of the potential Republican nominees as pieces of a newly invented sliding puzzle. Conkling held significant influence over the party during the 1880 Republican National Convention and attempted to use that to nominate Ulysses S. Grant, only to lose out to "dark horse" candidate James A. Garfield. More featured pictures More... edit Selected quote First of all, I would like to say that we discussed these issues at length, face to face, just the two of us. Russia has made its choice in favor of democracy. Fourteen years ago, independently, without any pressure from outside, it made that decision in the interests of itself and interests of its people -- of its citizens. This is our final choice, and we have no way back. There can be no return to what we used to have before. And the guarantee for this is the choice of the Russian people, themselves. No, guarantees from outside cannot be provided. This is impossible. It would be impossible for Russia today. Any kind of turn towards totalitarianism for Russia would be impossible, due to the condition of the Russian society. As far as the questions that are being discussed among our partners in the media, I can only repeat what has been said by the President of the United States. First, we are not going to make up -- to invent any kind of special Russian democracy; we are going to remain committed to the fundamental principles of democracy that have been established in the world. But, of course, all the modern institutions of democracy -- the principles of democracy should be adequate to the current status of the development of Russia, to our history and our traditions. — Vladimir Putin, Constitution Hall, 2005 More selected quotes More... edit News and Current events Wikinews on Politics and conflicts March 26: North Korea tests two missiles March 18: Kim Yo Jong criticizes US-South Korean military drills March 14: US President Biden signs US$1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief package March 7: Chinese NPC to take control of Hong Kong electoral system March 5: Chancellor Rishi Sunak announces UK budget 2021 March 5: International Criminal Court to investigate war crimes in Palestine March 1: Two Jordanian ministers caught breaking lockdown measures, resign February 27: Anas Sarwar wins leadership of Scottish Labour party February 13: Greek lawmakers approve contentious campus police legislation February 8: International Criminal Court rules its jurisdiction includes Palestine edit Selected biography Ramón Emeterio Betances was a Puerto Rican nationalist. He was the primary instigator of the Grito de Lares revolution and, as such, is considered to be the father of the Puerto Rican independence movement. Betances was also the most renowned medical doctor and surgeon of his time in Puerto Rico, and one of its first social hygienists. He had established a successful surgery and ophthalmology practice. Betances was also a diplomat, public health administrator, poet and novelist. He served as representative and contact for Cuba and the Dominican Republic in Paris. A firm believer in Freemasonry, his political and social activism was deeply influenced by the group's philosophical beliefs. His personal and professional relationships (as well as the organizational structure behind the Grito de Lares, an event that, in theory, clashes with traditional Freemason beliefs) were based upon his relationships with Freemasons, their hierarchical structure, rites and signs. More selected biographies More... edit Did you know... ...that political opportunity theory explains the rise and decline of social movements by their dependence on outside, political factors? ...that impeachment in Norway was used six times in 1814–1845, but only twice since? ...that The Mass Psychology of Fascism, a book written by Wilhelm Reich in 1933, blamed sexual repression for the rise of fascism? ...that Nazi scientists claimed to have trained a dog to call "Adolf Hitler" as "Mein Führer"? ...that for many years, the Russian Soviet Republic did not have its Communist Party? ...that the World War II idea of Polish-Czechoslovakian confederation was eventually discarded by the Czechs, whose leader chose instead to believe in the Soviet Union promises of alliance? ...that the UK's Workers Socialist Federation began as a suffragette group? ...that the Proletarian Revolutionary Organisation of Nepal proposed a synthesis of Buddhism and Maoism in 1977? More did you know facts edit In this month March 11, 2006 – Michelle Bachelet was sworn in as the first female President of Chile. March 20, 1854 – The Republican Party of the United States was founded in Ripon, Wisconsin. More selected anniversaries edit Related portals Anarchism Communism Conservatism European Union Feminism Freedom of speech Genocide Law Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism War edit Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews News Wikiquote Quotations Wikisource Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary Definitions Wikidata Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Politics Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Politics&oldid=1013386293" Categories: All portals Politics portals Politics portal Politics Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Random portal component with 31–40 available subpages Random portal component with 11–15 available image subpages Random portal component with 11–15 available subpages Random portal component with 26–30 available subpages Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikinews Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sicilianu Slovenčina Soomaaliga کوردی Suomi தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça ไทย Türkçe اردو West-Vlams 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 21 March 2021, at 10:21 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement