Axiology - Wikipedia Axiology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The philosophical study of value Axiology (from Greek ἀξία, axia: "value, worth"; and -λογία, -logia: "study of") is the philosophical study of value. It includes questions about the nature and classification of values and about what kinds of things have value. It is intimately connected with various other philosophical fields that crucially depend on the notion of value, like ethics, aesthetics or philosophy of religion.[1][2] It is also closely related to value theory and meta-ethics. The term was first used by Paul Lapie, in 1902,[3][4] and Eduard von Hartmann, in 1908.[5][6] The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic value is central to axiology: something is intrinsically valuable if it is good in itself or good for its own sake. It is usually held that intrinsic value depends on certain features of the valuable entity. For example, an experience may be said to be intrinsically valuable in virtue of being pleasurable. Extrinsic value, by contrast, is ascribed to things that are valuable only as a means to something else. Substantive theories of value try to determine which entities have intrinsic value. Monist theories hold that there is only one type of intrinsic value. The paradigm example of monist theories is hedonism, the thesis that only pleasure has intrinsic value. Pluralist theories, on the other hand, contend that there are various different types of intrinsic value, for example, virtue, knowledge, friendship, etc. Value pluralists face the problem of explaining whether or how the different types of value can be compared when making rational decisions. Some philosophers state that values do not exist on the most fundamental level of reality. One such view holds that a value statement about something just expresses the speaker's approval or disapproval of this thing. This position is opposed by realists about value. Contents 1 History 2 Intrinsic value 3 Ontological status of values 4 Monism and pluralism 5 Other concepts and distinctions 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links History[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Axiology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Between the 5th and 6th centuries BC, it was important in Greece to be knowledgeable if you were to be successful. Philosophers began to recognize that differences existed between the laws and morality of society. Socrates believed that knowledge had a vital connection to virtue, making morality and democracy closely intertwined. Socrates' student, Plato furthered the belief by establishing virtues which should be followed by all. E. J. Dijksterhuis found that axiological antithesis characterized the philosophy of ancient Greece:[7] ...typical Greek habit of thinking in axiological antitheses, of always wanting to decide which of two comparable activities, properties, or qualities is the higher, the better, the nobler or the more perfect. The Pythagoreans set the finite above the infinite, the odd above the even, the square above the rectangular, the male above the female. Plato never tires of arguing how much superior ideas are to appearance. Aristotle contrasts the imperfection of the sublunary sphere with the perfection of the celestial sphere. Thus uniform motion is also superior to non-uniform motion, a regular polyhedron is of greater value than any other polyhedron but is itself surpassed by the sphere. With the fall of the government, values became individual, causing skeptic schools of thought to flourish, ultimately shaping a pagan philosophy that is thought to have influenced and shaped Christianity. During the medieval period, Thomas Aquinas made the distinction between natural and supernatural (theological) virtues. This concept led philosophers to distinguish between judgments based on fact and judgments based on values, creating division between science and philosophy.[8] Intrinsic value[edit] Traditionally, philosophers held that an entity has intrinsic value if it is good in itself or good for its own sake.[9][10] Intrinsic value is contrasted with extrinsic or instrumental value, which is ascribed to things that are valuable only as a means to something else.[11] For example, tools like cars or microwaves are said to be extrinsically valuable in virtue of the function they perform, while the well-being they cause is intrinsically valuable, according to hedonism. The same entity can be valuable in different ways: some entities have both intrinsic and extrinsic values at the same time. Extrinsic values can form chains, in which one entity is extrinsically valuable because it is a means to another entity that is itself extrinsically valuable. It is commonly held that these chains must terminate somewhere and that the endpoint can only be intrinsically valuable.[12] The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic values is important for understanding various disagreements within axiology. Different substantive theories of value often agree on whether something, for example knowledge, is valuable while disagreeing on whether the value in question is intrinsic or extrinsic.[11][13] The traditional conception of intrinsic value presented above has been criticized in contemporary philosophy on the grounds that it combines various distinct notions that are better discussed separately.[14] One such contrast is between intrinsic and final values.[15] On a more narrow conception, an intrinsic value is a value an entity has in virtue of its intrinsic properties. For example, assuming that the phenomenal aspect of a pleasant experience is an intrinsic property, we might say that the experience is intrinsically valuable because of this intrinsic property. An entity with final value, by contrast, is valuable for its own sake.[15] It is usually accepted that there is a conceptual difference between intrinsic and final values.[14] For example, the pleasure experience may be said to be intrinsically valuable on the one hand, and finally valuable on the other hand. But it has been disputed whether there are actual things where these value types can come apart. Proposed candidates for bearers of final non-intrinsic value include unique or rare items (e.g. a stamp) or historically significant items (e.g. the pen that Abraham Lincoln used to sign the Emancipation Proclamation).[12] Being-rare and having-been-used-by-someone are extrinsic properties that may be responsible for their bearers having final value, i.e. being valuable for their own sake. Some philosophers have questioned whether extrinsic values should be regarded as values at all rather than as mere indications of values.[16] One reason for considering this idea is that adding or removing extrinsically valuable things does not affect the value of the whole if all intrinsically valuable things are kept constant.[12] For example, the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake had a negative extrinsic value because of all the damage it caused. But arguably, the world would not have been a better place if exactly the same damage had been caused without the earthquake. Ontological status of values[edit] In axiology, it is often important to distinguish between the entity that is valuable and the features in virtue of which it is valuable.[17] For example, an experience may be said to be valuable in virtue of being pleasurable. This distinction is particularly relevant for intrinsic values since it is commonly held that the intrinsic value of an entity supervenes on its intrinsic features.[15][18][19] This means that the entity could not have a different intrinsic value unless it had different intrinsic features. Substantive theories of value focus on the features in virtue of which something has intrinsic value.[11][13] Popular candidates for these features include pleasure, virtue and knowledge. Another question concerns the nature of the entities that are the bearers of value. The main approaches to this question can be divided into the Kantian tradition, which considers concrete things like persons to be the bearers of value, and the Moorean tradition, which holds that only states of affairs bear value.[15][14][20] This difference is important when determining whether a value is extrinsic or intrinsic to an entity. Some philosophers hold that objects like Napoleon's hat are valuable because of their relation to extraordinary persons. From a Kantian perspective, this value must be extrinsic since it is based on the extrinsic property of having been worn by an extraordinary person. But from a Moorean perspective, it can be intrinsic since it is born not by the hat but by a state of affairs involving both the hat and Napoleon.[14] The preceding discussion about the ontological categories of values and value-bearers assumes some form of realism: that there actually are valuable things. But the difficulties in reaching expert consensus in value-related fields like ethics, aesthetics or politics and considerations from naturalism have led various philosophers to doubt this assumption.[21] The ensuing dispute between cognitivists and non-cognitivists is usually held on the level of value-statements or value-attitudes, either concerning all values or specifically concerning ethical values. Cognitivists assert that value-statements are truth-apt, i.e. are either true or false, which is denied by non-cognitivists.[22][21] Most cognitivists are realists about values: they believe that values are part of reality. Error theory, as originally articulated by J. L. Mackie,[23] is an exception. Error theorists hold that all value-statements are false, and thereby truth-apt, because the world lacks value-features that would be needed to make them true.[24] Non-cognitivists, on the other hand, go one step further by denying that value-statements are truth-apt. This position involves the difficulty of explaining how value-statements can be meaningful despite lacking a truth value. This challenge can be met in different ways. Emotivists, following A. J. Ayer, state that value-statements only express the emotions of the speaker and are intended to influence the actions of the listener.[25] Prescriptivism, as developed by R. M. Hare, interprets value-statements as imperatives or commands.[26] Simon Blackburn's quasi-realism states that value statements project emotional attitudes as though they were real properties.[22][27] Monism and pluralism[edit] Substantive theories of value try to determine which entities have intrinsic value. A traditional dispute in this field is between monist and pluralist theories. Monist theories hold that there is only one type of intrinsic value. The paradigm example of monist theories is hedonism, the thesis that only pleasure has intrinsic value. Pluralist theories, on the other hand, contend that there are various different types of intrinsic value.[11][28][29] W. D. Ross, for example, holds that pleasure is only one type of intrinsic value besides other types, like knowledge.[13] It is important to keep in mind that this disagreement only concerns intrinsic value, not value at large.[11] So hedonists may be happy to concede that knowledge is valuable, but only extrinsically so, given that knowledge can be helpful in causing pleasure and avoiding pain. Various arguments have been suggested in the monism-pluralism-dispute. Common-sense seems to favor value pluralism: values are ascribed to a wide range of different things like happiness, liberty, friendship, etc. without any obvious common feature underlying these values.[28] One way to defend value monism is to cast doubt on the reliability of common-sense for technical matters like the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic value. This strategy is pursued by J. J. C. Smart, who holds that there is a psychological bias to mistake stable extrinsic values for intrinsic values.[30] Value pluralists have often attempted to provide exhaustive lists of all value types, but different theorists have suggested very different lists. These lists seem to constitute arbitrary selections unless a clear criterion could be provided why all and only these items are included. But if a criterion was to be found then such a theory would no longer be pluralistic. This dilemma suggests that pluralism is explanatory inadequate.[13] One issue closely related to the monism-pluralism-debate is the problem of incommensurability: the question of whether there are incommensurable values. Two values are incommensurable if there is no fact as to whether one is better than or as good as the other: there is no common value scale according to which they could be compared.[28][31] According to Joseph Raz, career choices between very different paths, for example, whether to become a lawyer or a clarinetist, are cases where incommensurable values are involved.[32] Value pluralists often assert that values belonging to different types are incommensurable with each other. Value monists, by contrast, usually deny that there are incommensurable values. This question is particularly relevant for ethics. If different options available to the agent embody incommensurable values then there seems to be no rational way to determine what ought to be done since there is no matter of fact as to which option is better.[28] Widespread incommensurability would threaten to undermine the practical relevance of ethics and rational choice. Other concepts and distinctions[edit] Many evaluative terms are found in everyday language, often with various different meanings.[11] It is important for philosophers to distinguish these different meanings in order to avoid misunderstandings. One such distinction is between a predicative and an attributive sense of good and bad.[17] In the attributive sense, an entity is good in relation to a certain kind.[33] For example, a person with a clear voice may be a good singer or a knife with a blunt edge may be a bad knife. But this still leaves it open whether the entity in question is good or bad in an unqualified or predicative sense. For example, a person may be a bad assassin but being bad as an assassin is not bad in a predicative sense.[34] Axiology is usually interested in the predicative sense of goodness.[35] But some philosophers deny that such a sense exists and therefore hold that all value is relative to a kind.[33] A second important distinction is that between being good for a person and being good for the world.[11][17] Being good for a person or prudential value has to do with this person's welfare or well-being.[36][33] But what is good for one person may be bad for another person. For example, having a dry summer may be good for the hiker in virtue of the pleasant hiking conditions, but bad for the farmer, whose crop is dying because of a lack of water. In such cases, the question arises as to what is good for the world or good simpliciter. Utilitarians can solve this problem by defining the good for the world as the sum of the good for each persons.[11] Philosophers often distinguish between evaluative concepts (like good or bad) and deontic concepts (like right, fitting or ought).[33] The former belong to axiology proper and express what has worth or value while the latter belong to ethics (and related fields) and express what one ought to do.[37] Philosophers have tried to provide a unified account of these two fields since they seem to be intimately related. Consequentialists see evaluative concepts as fundamental and define deontic concepts in terms of evaluative concepts. Fitting-attitude theories, on the other hand, try to reduce evaluative concepts to deontic concepts.[11] Consequentialism is an ethical theory that holds that, given a certain set of possible actions, we ought to perform the action that has the best overall consequences.[38] So what we ought to do is defined in evaluative terms: whatever leads to the consequences with the highest value. Fitting-attitude theories are axiological theories that define the value of something in terms of the attitude that would be fitting to have towards this thing,[11][39] for example, that it would be good to find a cure for cancer because this would be a fitting object of desire. These accounts build on the deontic notion that some of our attitudes towards the world are fitting or right to define what is good.[33] See also[edit] Axiological ethics Fact–value distinction Praxeology Nikolay Lossky Money – Object or record accepted as payment Nihilism – Philosophy antithetical to concepts of meaningfulness Russian philosophy – Wikipedia list article Utility – Concept in economics and game theory Value (economics) – Measure of the benefit provided by a good or service to an economic agent Value (ethics) – Personal value, basis for ethical action References[edit] ^ Flew, Antony (1979). "Axiology". A Dictionary of Philosophy Editorial Consultant, Antony Flew. –. Macmillan. ^ Random House Unabridged Dictionary Entry on Axiology. ^ Lapie, Paul (1902). Logique de la volonté. Paris: F. Alcan. ^ "Axiology and aesthetics - article". www.infotaste.com. ^ von Hartmann, Eduard (1908). Grundriss der Axiologie. Hermann Haacke. ^ Samuel L. Hart. Axiology—Theory of Values. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. ^ E. J. Dijksterhuis (1961) The Mechanization of the World Picture C. Dikshoorn translator, pages 75 & 75, via Internet Archive ^ Arneson, P. (2009). Axiology. In S. Littlejohn, & K. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia of communication theory. (pp. 70-74). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. ^ Honderich, Ted (2005). "good-in-itself". The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University Press. ^ Borchert, Donald M. (2006). "Intrinsic Value". Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition. Macmillan. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Schroeder, Mark (2016). "Value Theory". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 8 December 2020. ^ a b c Zimmerman, Michael J.; Bradley, Ben (2019). "Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Value". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 8 December 2020. ^ a b c d Heathwood, Chris (2015). "8. Monism and Pluralism about Value". The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory. Oxford University Press USA. ^ a b c d Orsi, Francesco (2015). "2. Meet the Values: Intrinsic, Final & Co". Value Theory. Bloomsbury Academic. ^ a b c d Rønnow-Rasmussen, Toni (2015). "2. Intrinsic and extrinsic value". The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory. Oxford University Press USA. ^ Zimmerman, Michael J. (2001). "Appendix: Extrinsic Value". The Nature of Intrinsic Value. Rowman & Littlefield. ^ a b c Orsi, Francesco (2015). "1. Value and Normativity". Value Theory. Bloomsbury Academic. ^ Bunnin, Nicholas; Yu, Jiyuan (2009). "value, intrinsic". The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy. Wiley. ISBN 978-0-470-99721-5. ^ Audi, Robert. "value". The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. ^ Bradley, Ben (2006). "Two Concepts of Intrinsic Value". Ethical Theory and Moral Practice. 9 (2): 111–130. doi:10.1007/s10677-006-9009-7. ^ a b van Roojen, Mark (2018). "Moral Cognitivism vs. Non-Cognitivism". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 10 December 2020. ^ a b Craig, Edward (1996). "Value, ontological status of". Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Routledge. ^ Mackie, John Leslie (1977). Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong. Penguin Books. ^ Blackburn, Simon (2006). "Error theory of ethics". Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition. Macmillan. ^ Finlay, Stephen (2006). "Emotive theory of ethics". Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition. Macmillan. ^ Carson, Thomas L. (2006). "Metaethics". Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition. Macmillan. ^ Joyce, Richard. "Moral Anti-Realism > Projectivism and Quasi-realism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 10 December 2020. ^ a b c d Mason, Elinor (2018). "Value Pluralism". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 9 December 2020. ^ Frankena, William K. (2006). "Value and Valuation". Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition. Macmillan. ^ Smart, J. J. C.; Williams, Bernard (1973). "3. Hedonistic and non-hedonistic utilitarianism". Utilitarianism: For and Against. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ^ Raz, Joseph (1986). "VII—Value Incommensurability: Some Preliminaries". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society. 86 (1): 117–134. doi:10.1093/aristotelian/86.1.117. ^ Hsieh, Nien-hê (2016). "Incommensurable Values". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. ^ a b c d e Zimmerman, Michal J. (2015). "1. Value and Normativity". The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory. Oxford University Press USA. ^ Silverstein, Matthew (2016). "Teleology and Normativity". Oxford Studies in Metaethics. 11: 214–240. ^ Orsi, Francesco (2015). "3. The Challenge against Absolute Value". Value Theory. Bloomsbury Academic. ^ Tiberius, Valerie (2015). "9. Prudential Value". The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory. Oxford University Press USA. ^ Tappolet, Christine (2013). "Evaluative Vs. Deontic Concepts". International Encyclopedia of Ethics. Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 1791–99. ^ Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2019). "Consequentialism". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. ^ Jacobson, Daniel (2011). "Fitting Attitude Theories of Value". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Further reading[edit] Hartman, Robert S. (1967). The Structure of Value. USI Press. 384 pages. Findlay, J. N. (1970). Axiological Ethics. New York: Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-00269-5. 100 pages. Rescher, Nicholas (2005). Value Matters: Studies in Axiology. Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag. ISBN 3-937202-67-6. 140 pages. Cushan, Anna-Marie. Investigations into Facts and Values: Groundwork for a theory of moral conflict resolution (PDF). Melbourne: Ondwelle. Marías, Julián (1967). History of Philosophy. New York: Dover Publications, Inc. External links[edit] Look up axiology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Value Theory". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Cultura: International Journal of Philosophy of Culture and Axiology Axiology.org.uk Axiology at PhilPapers Links to related articles v t e Philosophy Branches Traditional Metaphysics Epistemology Logic Ethics Aesthetics Philosophy of... Action Color Culture Design Music Film Cosmology Education Environment Geography Happiness History Human nature Humor Feminism Language Law Life Literature Mathematics Medicine Healthcare Psychiatry Mind Pain Psychology Perception Philosophy Religion Science Physics Chemistry Biology Sexuality Social science Business Culture Economics Politics Society Space and time Sport Technology Artificial intelligence Computer science Engineering Information War Schools of thought By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Neotaoism Taoism Yangism Chan Greco-Roman Aristotelianism Atomism Cynicism Cyrenaics Eleatics Eretrian school Epicureanism Hermeneutics Ionian Ephesian Milesian Megarian school Neoplatonism Peripatetic Platonism Pluralism Presocratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Sophistic Stoicism Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogacara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism East Asian Korean Confucianism Edo neo-Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo-Kantianism Hegelianism Marxism Spinozism 0 Anarchism Classical Realism Liberalism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Normative ethics Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School New Historicism Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Other Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism more... Positions Aesthetics Formalism Institutionalism Aesthetic response Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Mind Behaviorism Emergentism Eliminativism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By region Related lists Miscellaneous By region African Ethiopian Amerindian Aztec Eastern Chinese Egyptian Indian Indonesian Iranian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Pakistani Vietnamese Middle Eastern Western American Australian British Czech Danish French German Greek Italian Polish Romanian Russian Slovene Spanish Turkish Lists Outline Index Years Problems Schools Glossary Philosophers Movements Publications Miscellaneous Natural law Sage Theoretical philosophy / Practical philosophy Women in philosophy Portal Category v t e Metaphysics Metaphysicians Parmenides Plato Aristotle Plotinus Duns Scotus Thomas Aquinas Francisco Suárez Nicolas Malebranche René Descartes John Locke David Hume Thomas Reid Immanuel Kant Isaac Newton Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Georg W. F. Hegel George Berkeley Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Christian Wolff Bernard Bolzano Hermann Lotze Henri Bergson Friedrich Nietzsche Charles Sanders Peirce Joseph Maréchal Ludwig Wittgenstein Martin Heidegger Alfred N. Whitehead Bertrand Russell G. E. Moore Jean-Paul Sartre Gilbert Ryle Hilary Putnam P. F. Strawson R. G. Collingwood Rudolf Carnap Saul Kripke W. V. O. Quine G. E. M. Anscombe Donald Davidson Michael Dummett D. M. Armstrong David Lewis Alvin Plantinga Héctor-Neri Castañeda Peter van Inwagen Derek Parfit Alexius Meinong Ernst Mally Edward N. Zalta more ... Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Realism Physicalism Platonic idealism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Subjectivism Substance theory Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Being Category of being Causality Causal closure Choice Cogito, ergo sum Concept Embodied cognition Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Information Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Memetics Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Notion Object Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value more ... Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Ontology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Theoretical physics Category Philosophy portal v t e Logic Outline History Fields Computer science Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Philosophy portal Category WikiProject (talk) changes Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Axiology&oldid=1014811124" Categories: Axiology Concepts in aesthetics Concepts in ethics Concepts in metaphysics Critical thinking Ethics Meta-ethics Metaphilosophy Philosophy Thought Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles needing additional references from January 2009 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Zazaki 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 29 March 2021, at 06:22 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement